We're talking with Mr. Bob Abrams at Abbeville Press in New York, and you were just telling me about what you feel about books, and I thought that was a pretty interesting quote to start there.
What I was saying was that I believe very strongly in books.
I think they're almost the only excuse that we've got to be on this planet and do what we do.
I think they, by and large, record the best of what we as human beings have to offer to any sense of creation or sense of order, sense of reason.
And...
They're almost redemptive, I would say, as a race.
I don't know what else we can point to that gives us this quality that
any kind of sentient being 10,000 years from now might look back and say, well, what did these creatures do?
I mean, most of what we do is indeed ephemeral.
It passes.
Most of what we do as human beings is ephemeral.
It passes just like everything.
else passes, but this need and attempt by some people to record it and to organize it and to bear witness to these acts and facts, I think, is, I mean, it's
For me, it's close to a kind of a divine inspiration, and I think that that is what is contained in all these books that exist everywhere.
You were born in, I mean, this is something that you probably don't ever remember, loving a book for the first time.
I mean, you were born into a book family, I gather.
I mean, this isn't something that you've just developed as a philosophy over the last 10 or 15 years.
I suspect this is something that you've felt out of your life.
Is that a fair statement?
No, I don't think it's quite fair.
I think it has been relatively recent that I've actually come to
this kind of a conclusion I'd say the last five years or so as I've watched folly after folly and horror after horror in our own lifetime and as well as some you know wonderful things marvelous things but
The only thing that actually gives some kind of form to all of these things is somebody's devotion to actually recording it, both the good and the bad, and passing that on to a broader public and anonymous
public.
And there's this urge and need to communicate that I think about as I try and define my own position in this chain of creation and what I do and what
and what we're here for as a species.
And so, I mean, I think it is relatively... It's a relatively new concept for me.
It's not something I was born with.
It's not something that my father ever articulated.
But you were always surrounded by beautiful books.
Yeah, I was very fortunate to...
I grew up in a house that had lots and lots of wonderful books.
I went to good schools that had good libraries, in elementary school and in high school and in college.
Fabulous.
libraries, I think, for the standards, relative to the standards, unfortunately, that exist in most of the U.S.
I went to school, private school here in New York, ethical culture, and then Fieldston, and then Harvard, and then graduate school at Harvard.
Graduate school in what?
In business.
I got an MBA.
Did you ever go over to that?
Oh, sure.
I've been at the Houghton Library.
I haunted the fog.
One of the reasons that I chose my, at least one of the reasons I gave to myself for choosing my undergraduate major, which was unusual at the time, still is unusual.
It was fine arts.
I was a fine arts major.
I wonder how that happened.
Well, fine arts, my rationale at the time, I think, was really very, very sound, and I'm still impressed with it, and that was that there were about 20 people a year that concentrated in fine arts, and I believed strongly in the value of a liberal education, and I thought what counted really was
the teachers and the education, and at Harvard they had a system of, kind of modeled on the English system, of a tutorial system, and full, I knew given the fact that
there would probably be ten Harvard people and maybe ten Cliffys, that I would almost be guaranteed a full professor for my tutor.
And, in fact, I had two full professors for my tutors.
Really?
And what I was saying was one of the criteria that made me concentrate in fine arts, which is art history in most other schools,
was the amount of resources per undergraduate that I would enjoy.
I would not be competing with 600
other undergrads, or a thousand, whatever the number was, 800.
Did the family profession, though, have any, I mean, is it just coincidental that your father was publishing books on fine arts that you could?
Well, it made me feel less strange in going in that direction.
And I also, I'm sure, subconsciously knew that I certainly could put it to some use.
despite the widespread conception that it was useless.
But as I said, I believe and still do believe very strongly in the value of a liberal education and being educated to be educated, because education isn't something that stops
at school and it doesn't stop when you're finished with school.
Let me just interject one reason I've enjoyed being a book review editor for the last 13 years and considered one of the great jobs in the world is that it's a continuation for me of a liberal arts education.
I mean, to get all these books every year and pick what I want to read.
I assign myself because I assign books to my reviewers.
It's wonderful.
There is no substitute I quite agree with on.
Yeah.
But if you get the good one, it doesn't matter.
I don't really think it does matter whether it's in art history or whether it's poetry or whether it's psychology or sociology or anything.
The key is being exposed to a great mind.
And I was very fortunate at Harvard.
I had, early on, a freshman tutorial with Eric Erickson, a great mind in psychology and psychiatry, and there were roughly sixteen of us in a freshman year tutorial.
Well, you know, it's one thing to sit with a teaching assistant
who really is more concerned with their own advancement through the hierarchy of an educational institution, and maybe I'm doing teaching assistance a disservice, but very often that can be the case, versus sitting with somebody who is mature and
self-confident in their abilities and their knowledge and their lack of knowledge and is inherently interested in teaching and when you get a great teacher it doesn't matter whether they're teaching biology or art history or poetry or
even math or science or anything like that.
Did you come directly into the business?
No, I mean, after college, I then worked with my father in his old publishing company.
Which still retains his name as your name?
Yes.
That's Harry Abrams, and that is my type of statement.
Yeah.
And, uh, Harry N. Abrams.
Harry N. Abrams.
Yes, he sits there looking down at your portrait of Norman Rockwell that Norman Rockwell did.
Oh, I was glad you pointed that out.
That's something that goes in the notes.
Well, at the time, he asked me whether I wanted the business.
It was soon after.
I went to work with him, because it was a time when people were merging companies left and right.
There was the first discovery of
publishing as a growth industry in the 60s.
Something other than the cottage industry, I guess.
And it was the knowledge, it was called the knowledge industry.
In the 70s, it was the information industry, it was everything except publishing, which gave it a higher multiple.
But at the time,
I had experienced, I was experiencing difficulties with my father that had nothing to do with the business, and everything to do with just the father-son relationship.
And I felt that if I said that I wanted the business, I would have ended up with the business and lost the father.
And I chose to have the father.
So at that point,
Soon thereafter, Dad had received an offer that was attractive, and the business was sold, and I went to work down on Wall Street.
This was about when?
It was 1966.
My father, I'd like to point out, didn't finish ninth grade in high school.
yet rose to be an incredibly important force in book publishing.
Do you have a feel for what attracted him to do with the books, beautiful books with the empires and beautiful books?
Books and works a lot in the wrong way.
But he certainly set the standard.
I can only speculate.
He had studied at the Art Students League and loved art and trained in the advertising industry and taught himself design and layout.
The family goes back.
I'm not sure whether it was my great-grandfather who was supposed to be an extremely learned rabbi or not, but my grandfather was supposed to be extremely bright.
But he had a shoe store.
And Dad dropped out of school to
help his father and help the family earn money he had to.
Actually, his father ended up failing as a shoe salesman.
My father, however, was extremely good as a salesman, a shoe salesman, and ended up supporting the family selling shoes.
So how he got into book publishing, it came from the Art Students League, and I suppose a generational respect for learning and knowledge.
And he found his way into working at the Book of the Month Club in its very formative years with a man named Harry Sherman, who was kind of a
a mentor, father figure to him, a kind of a genius in his own right.
And in the Book of the Month Club's most formative years, Dad was held basically three positions.
He was the art director.
He was the director of advertising and promotion.
and also director of production.
He understood business and the market, shall we say.
Well, he was a workaholic.
He was extremely talented and, you know, he was brilliant.
I mean, he could do all those jobs and do them brilliantly.
largely self-taught.
When did he start Harry Ann Abrams?
He started that in 1949.
When do you think he started collecting his own books?
I think it must have been
in the 20s and 30s, I'm not exactly sure.
He was a young man.
As he got into the book business, certainly the book of the month of and before that.
Is the focus strictly art books?
No, it was all books.
Can I just get you to sign those, please?
Where were we?
You were asking whether he collected just art books?
But that was the principal focus, perhaps?
No, no.
He loved books.
The fact that you said that he finished in ninth grade, the fact that he wasn't formally educated but had this great reverence.
Obviously.
for thought, for achievement, for the printed word.
This must have had something to do with his reverence for books.
These are the instruments of education, I think.
Much of what you articulated earlier about what books represent seems to have all, I would have to think, is your father's philosophy as well.
Maybe you're making an assumption here.
I don't know.
It could have been
You know, I wouldn't say he would disagree with what I articulated.
He never articulated it.
But he loved his book, too, didn't he?
Yeah, he loved his book.
Did he say he loved him?
Was it obvious he loved him?
How did he express his love for these books?
He spent all his time at them, for sure.
Publishing them, which means I'm making them.
But, you know, I think you have to be...
careful about generations and where it all comes from.
And you have a reverence and a respect for my father.
I don't think it's
any more than my own.
I don't think it's, it might not be any less, but I think, you know, my own feeling is that the old Abrams Company is haunted by his ghost.
You know, I'm not.
You know, I think
I distinguish myself from my father.
He had certain things that I don't have.
I've got certain things that he doesn't and didn't have.
So that to attribute whatever I say as something that must have come from him, I think is kind of unfair.
If he didn't say it, and if he didn't express it, well, it's not to say that he wouldn't agree with my particular expression, but it doesn't necessarily mean that my particular expression, you know, is what he felt.
He had a need, he had a need, it was first generation, he came here at four.
From England.
He was born in England.
you know, the degree to which, you know, his passion for books was an obsession or a need or, I mean, things differ.
And I'm not, as much as I appreciate my father and his achievements, as I look at Abbeville,
Happyville is a company that has been run by me, largely.
Dad, we started the company together in 1977, and Dad died in 1979.
1979 is a long time ago.
Dad was lucky.
He was really lucky in his life.
1979, just when he died, was when Volcker started to control the money supply and interest rates shot up.
He didn't have to live through that.
Do you think your father founded the company, this new company, with the idea of doing something that you can tell us?
I mean, he'd already done it.
Yeah, but he had to continue.
The old company kicked him out.
Basically, they kicked him upstairs, because they couldn't accept being run by an entrepreneur anymore.
try and bring it under some kind of corporate control.
Can you say it was delightfully idiosyncratic?
I don't think there was anything idiosyncratic about it.
It was personal.
Yeah.
He hadn't been able to
bring in a successor, and I don't think that the company, the taxpayer company, should be faulted for wanting to encourage and provide for succession.
But the way they did it was about as ungracious and as inept as the way most corporations act.
You mean how they handled your father's departure?
Yeah.
And they maintained to this day that he resigned.
That's really the cover, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, when you say, when you take somebody, you take the general's horse out from under him and say that he's resigned, I mean... He's being returned to Washington for administrative duties or whatever.
We take him out of the field.
At that point, having done other things after I went to business school, and at that point when my father was forced out,
He said to me, well, we'll start our own publishing business.
So there wasn't anyone else in the room, and I knew he meant him and me.
And I wasn't about to say, what do you mean, we white man?
The old Canto line.
But in fact, I knew how important it was for him to keep
going.
I mean, he didn't have anything else than publishing.
He was 72.
I mean, he was monomaniacal about publishing.
So I don't think I'm monomaniacal.
I don't think I've got the same needs.
I've got a different set of resources, conditions that I've grown up with.
And so
So, that's why I'm saying to attribute everything to the old man isn't real.
You were working down on Wall Street, I think you said, at that time.
Yeah.
No, I had worked on Wall Street after working for my father.
I wrote one of the first reports on the CATV industry without having taken a course in economics.
Because, again, I had a good teacher, an analyst down at Lehman Brothers who was terrific.
I certainly wouldn't want my kids burdened with my achievements or my sins, whatever they may be.
and I want them to be judged on their own, for their own lives.
And I think that's only fair.
What was the attitude over at Harry and Abrams, Inc., when Harry and Abrams and Simon and Robert began every film?
Was there any opposition to this?
Yeah, they were concerned, and I think it reflected
perhaps their own guilt at the way they had undertaken the separation.
And, I mean, it was amazing because this was a Fortune 500 company and it was just
You mean Times Mirror?
Yeah, Times Mirror.
And it was just the two of us, you know, trying to start, for some crazy reason, another art book publishing company.
Yeah, that's the name of Harry and Abrams.
It had and still has
But as I say, I'm glad he's haunting there and he's not haunting here.
Go back and just elaborate.
You said you believe that your father's spirit haunts the halls of Harry and Abrams.
What do you mean by that?
Well, they have to live up to some kind of image of what Harry was all about.
And that's what I'm saying I don't have to do.
The company bears his name.
It bears his name, and they've got to kind of guess, and people expect Harry Abrams to be like Harry Abrams, like my old man never died.
Well, he died.
He's gone.
But the corporation doesn't die.
So it was a thing that worked, and it's just like this idea that Walt Disney is
cryogenically preserved someplace, where there's still that magic of Walt, that at this Uncle Walt, that the current owners have capitalized on.
I'm afraid my feeling is that they've capitalized far too fully and run it into the ground without
That's a very interesting thing, isn't it?
Reinvesting in it, because I don't think there could be anything further from the original spirit of Walt Disney than the current management.
But just Touchstone Pictures is not a... I mean, they own Touchstone Pictures.
Sure.
They do very un-Walt Disney kinds of things.
Well, it's not that, and I don't begrudge them doing motion pictures, except...
Well, I don't think he'd agree with our ratings, though.
Yeah, I mean, again, I don't think that I wouldn't, I don't begrudge, I think it's a kind of an attitude that Walt had, and a genius, and a concern, and a fastidiousness, a concern with his characters.
We did a book
here at Abbeville called Disney Animation, The Illusion of Life.
And it was written by Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston.
And these were two of the great animators who worked under Walt in the classic films.
And these were
these are two brilliant, Stanford-educated Californians with an extraordinary artistic talent and verbal ability to express themselves.
And, you know, if you look at that book, that book I think says about as much about
what Walt Disney was about as any book that I think has been written.
Were you thinking about parallels when you sang on that book?
Oh, yeah.
You brought up the parallels.
Yeah, there is a, there is a, there are parallels between Walt.
Were you thinking about them when you were saying that?
I was aware of it, yeah.
I was always aware of the parallel with Walt.
And the problems of
succession, and how do you come after somebody of such extraordinary genius and talent.
So how have you done it?
And you've done it quite successfully.
I wonder how you managed to resolve that.
Well, like I said, the first time around I chose
the father, not the business.
The second time around, I was 30-something, and I guess I was 34, and I'd done some things on my own, and Dad was 72, and it was very clear to me that I was needed, that there was urgency here, that
my father would suffer tremendous anxiety, emotional distress, illness, if he wasn't kept busy, and that regardless of how I felt about him as a father, I knew his love and respect for me were extremely real, and that I owed him a tremendous debt.
How many siblings, by the way?
I have an older brother.
Never been involved in things?
Yeah, I've been involved, kind of inspirationally involved, as well as a tremendous number of ideas, and they've done a few covers for us.
What was the first book that you did for Abby Bell, Robert and Harriet?
but you come right away to it.
It probably doesn't.
No, it doesn't.
No, we did.
It wasn't some great moment then where you collaborated on this, on the first time of your book.
Uh, no, it wasn't the, I mean, the epiphanous moment.
No, I don't, I don't think so.
I think we were, we were running hard.
The first few, uh, years we did a, we, we packaged books.
Uh, we did some reprints.
Uh, we, uh,
tried to get going as a business, and it was very hard.
It was a business to break into it, wasn't it?
Yeah, especially when you didn't have any money, as we did.
Would you have liked to have been able to bring the Harry in line with what we were talking about, the succession, so to speak, following Harry Abrams with the successors at Disney, opening the new business,
and having to call it Abbeville and not using the name which really is his, you know?
Would you like to have been able to call this new company Harry Abrams, or did it work out better for you to have another name, Abbeville?
I think it's fine.
It's fine the way it is.
I mean, that's, you know, they... You might have had to carry a little more baggage is what I'm suggesting, you know?
I wonder how many people knew that Harry Abrams was involved in Abbeville outside of the profession, outside of the business.
I think that's all that was really necessary at the early stages.
At this point, I don't know how many people, again, associate Abbeville with my father.
And I guess what I was pointing out, trying to point out earlier on, was my father died in 1979.
There isn't much really to associate
Abbeville with Harry, and the kinds of books that we publish while living very nicely within what my father did are different, and they're Abbeville, and that's what
What I said is nice about not having to live with his ghost.
I mean, I'm not concerned about his sitting there on the wall looking down and smiling.
He did his thing.
I'll do mine.
My kids will do theirs.
You do yours.
We all do what we can, hopefully to the best of our ability.
Tell me it is said, and I don't know where I saw this, but you picked the name Abbeville so you could show up earlier in LNP ahead of Harry Abrams.
That was one of the criteria, and the other one was the fact that my brother lived on Abbeville Road in London.
But you are essentially the first publisher in LNP.
There are a couple now that are ahead of you, I guess.
You're still in the first page.
Let's talk now about the collection.
Well, that's what I said.
I'm not sure that I, you know, I qualify as a collector.
Well, I think you do.
Well, I love the story, so you definitely, the story is wonderful.
You know, obviously I'm involved in books, but I'm not sure that I'm a collector.
I can tell you right now, I love the story.
Well, I'm not sure I'm a collector.
I would think that I could come closer to
being a collector in art, in contemporary art.
Yeah, but you know what, you have assumed, you have taken, you know, we always say, we don't really own books, we're custodians of books.
Books last longer than people do.
And the standards, what happens, I mean, Bradley Martin's book's wonderful collection, you know, he was gone within the year, the books were being sold myself, basically.
despite whatever protestations you might hear from his wife that Bradley would like to see him go to the next generation of collectors, that's baloney.
The Bessemer Trust said, this is how we maximize the estate, and we sell these things.
And they took $20, $30 million, whatever.
Generally speaking, books do not go on to the next generation.
And it's quite remarkable and unusual that you have chosen to assume custody of your father's books, and I assume, I imagine, to some extent add to them.
I mean, as a collection, it's more of an accumulation.
As I said, I haven't had the time to devote to it.
I mean, I would like to devote to it.
You know, I'm more involved in
trying to create 50, 60 books a year here, and the difficulties involved in that, and next year, and the following year, and manage a backlist of 300, much less to have a collection.
At some point, it would be... I mean, I've got a lot of books, and I enjoy having them, and I want more.
But I'm not sure yet that I would qualify myself as a... As an active collector.
As a collector, yeah.
Well, tell me what the collection means to you.
What books mean to you.
I think I've said what books... Not the book in general, these books, the books.
Well... The collection.
Well, that's where I think...
I don't have a real self-conscious sense of the collection, of a collection of books.
I think the collection of books is yet to be made, quite frankly.
I said, well, I think my collection of books is yet to be made.
You know, the best things are really out there ahead of me in the next 20, 30, 40, or 50 years.
That's very interesting.
Tell me a little bit about the collection, because I've not seen any of it.
I would at some point, if it's possible, to see some of these things.
This is not possible for me today, but if it's all right with you, do you think we could get together again at some point?
You could show me some of these books?
Yeah, except they're... You ought to go forward with this.
But they're...
They're dispersed in different areas.
A lot of it is in storage.
I still don't have room to shelve all my books.
How large is the collection ballpark?
I don't know.
I really don't know.
It's not that huge.
It's just that I know I've got at least a hundred cartons of material.
Again, I'm not sure how
And it's not all art books.
But, you know, I do, I do like, I like the book.
There are some wonderful books that
my father and mother had, have.
But again, I'm not, I haven't devoted the time, I haven't been able to have a curator or a librarian devote the time to pick them out and catalog them.
I bought a collection of children's books some years ago, a
It must have been about 200-odd volumes that I do have in one section.
It's the kind of thing that I wish I could have done more of.
But as I said, I really haven't had the time.
You said that you feel the best of your collection is ahead.
What does that mean?
Does that mean that there's a bug in there?
Sure.
You just haven't had the time, and you're certainly a busy man trying to do 50 or 60 titles that do titles a year, as you mentioned.
But this is something you expect to become more involved in, I gather.
I hope so.
I hope I am able to find the time to
Do the individual titles span a great deal of time?
Are they all contemporary art books, or are there any really old ones, like 200-year-old art books?
No, there are not many old ones.
I remember one of the things that I
really enjoyed about my time as an undergraduate at Harvard was rummaging through the fog.
And that's part of what my appraisal was, the resources per person.
It was devoted to the study of someone who wanted to concentrate in art history.
You have one of the most incredible art libraries at Harvard
beautifully organized.
And, you know, there were only twenty of us, and we had the complete run of it.
So I love the old material.
There's some very, you know, they're great libraries, and we owe a great debt to
collectors and I'm happy to support in any way your book which I think brings out the importance of collectors and books and libraries.
So whatever you think
can help that I can do, I'm happy to do.
Okay.
I think that's about an hour on tape, and why don't I assess this and have my typist type it.
One other question, and maybe I've asked it and you've answered it truthfully.
I know you've answered it truthfully, but I guess I'm trying to get some kind of a sense of the meaning of these particular books to you, if they have any meaning beyond, I mean, is it kind of a personal
legacy that's been passed on to you?
I mean, it's not something you'd ever consider selling, certainly.
You'd never consider parting with these books like that.
I mean, I like having them around.
And I like browsing.
And certainly, in this case, I have memories of the apartment where I grew up.
in the library and how nice it was to browse the books.
I can't think of anything that is nicer to grow up in than a home that has a lot of books.
My children or their children will feel the same way.
I don't know.
I certainly wouldn't load any guilt on them if they didn't.
What I like is your attitude is very refreshing and you don't feel like you're carrying all this baggage.
It appears to me to be a very healthy attitude.
It's a very healthy attitude.
I think it's definitely we all do what we have to do to survive.
And I think one thing that my father gave me very early on, which maybe
did it for me was, again, whatever other shortcomings there were, from a very early age, he really gave me a feeling that he respected my judgment, my opinion, I mean, from almost an incredibly early age.
He really listened to me.
And so I suppose, you know, it must have been, it must be that, that he dealt with me, you know, as an individual that he respected, that was clearly separate, that somehow must have made it easier for me to deal with him, and to feel indeed separate and worthy of being separate, and without
and very much enjoy the differences, whatever the similarities.
He'd be part of the business, though.
I'm sure he wouldn't be unhappy with it.
I mean, he always wanted me to get into the business, whether this was some kind of a Machiavellian way of his to make it work out, or whether
It was just meant to be or whatever, who the hell knows.
But I'm very proud of the things that all of us here at Abbeville have done, and I certainly don't think of it as just my effort at all, because I run the company very differently than he did.
But the books we've published, I'm extremely proud of.
I'm proud of the editors and the dedication and the quality and the fact that we've been able to survive and grow in what I think has been some of the most difficult times in publishing ever.
still in a relatively obscure niche of people's consciousness.
I'm very proud of the work that everybody's done, and I think it reflects the need, you know, this underlying need for society to communicate and to
to assert that there is something worthwhile about our existence that should be preserved and available to succeeding generations.
I still get a thrill.
These books mean things to me, but I still get a thrill going to the Library of Congress, as I have, and any of the great libraries.
It's not so much that the book is mine that thrills me.
And I know what it is to collect, because I do consider myself something of a collector in art.
Art or art books?
Art.
This is a whole other area we haven't touched on, is that right?
Yeah.
So I know what it is to be a collector and to feel the importance of possession and to be particularly attracted to an object.
Is a book different than an art piece, an artwork, a painting, as an object?
A painting you put on the wall and you enjoy, almost collectively, a book is something that sometimes nobody knows you won't except yourself.
That's also true in a piece of art.
You know, I don't know.
I think that's a different... That's why I'm... what I was expressing to you, I'm not sure that I am
a collector, in the sense that you have been dealing with collectors.
You're not driven to acquire books.
No, I would like to, as I enjoy, you know, and do from time to time.
Are you driven to collect art?
Are you driven?
You're not an obsessive person, probably.
I'm not sure exactly how I'm driven beyond... Would you say that you're an obsessive person in anything?
I think I have an obsession to try and understand.
I think that is an obsession, to really try and understand my environment.
I think I'm an infomaniac.
I mean, the more information... Say that again for my type of...
You caught it.
And I think if we're to survive and leave something, again, better for our children and for our children's children and our friends' children,
something for the world.
We have to be able to understand what's going on, not just participate in it, not just go along with the flow and just be moved, but we have to be able to reflect and make sense.
And that is what, in fact,
people try and do when they try and write a book.
It's an individual's attempt to organize that which is not necessarily organized at all.
It's random.
And to apply intelligence and care and consideration, whatever.